so this is what about
pixel overview and if you intended
attended the State of the Union a lot of
the content is going to seem similar but
we're going to go in a lot more depth
than you saw on the State of the Union
and we're going to cover a lot more
parts of the technology so what does
this session all about well it's really
about power cuz web Bob because is about
power and this session is about teaching
you how to harness the power of web
objects and the applications you right
but it's also about elegance you ask a
lot of veteran web objects developers
why they like using web objects they say
that it's very elegant and another
reason they like it is because it's
sophisticated and the point is not that
web objects is sophisticated although it
is but it helps you build sophisticated
up applications and allows you to do
really difficult things that other
application development environments
make it very hard to do but
fundamentally web objects about
productivity you have to write a web
application so you have to get something
done and what about this helps you get
to market faster and write a better
application the first time and well
Bobby once you get it it's a lot of fun
so we're going to hopefully have some
fun today so we're going to learn well
you're gonna learn what about objects is
unless you probably know what it is but
most importantly i'm going to show you
what you can do with web objects now
when you think of web Bobby you probably
think of HTML applications but it's
really much more than that because it's
designed to be very flexible very
modular and so you can target types of
network applications that you might not
know that you can so we're going to show
you some unique examples and then we're
going to show you how to learn and to
learn web objects you need to know about
the building blocks and the tools that
you use to build these applications so
we're going to look at each of the tools
and we're going to look at each of the
frameworks of the most important
frameworks in any web objects
application and then we're actually
going to go behind the scene in running
Web APIs application so you can get a
sense of the objects that are involved
in that application and what your role
as web objects developer is in building
those objects and adding value to the
objects that we provide you and
throughout the session the whole idea is
to help you know and get a sense of how
to start learning this technology so
first of all what is web objects well if
we can come up with a one-sentence
definition that encompasses everything
went babak's is about this is probably
it it software made up of frameworks and
tools that help you build network
applications
with data from multiple data sources
well this is a long way of saying that
really web babak's is an application
server so this is another marketing talk
but if you're going to build web objects
applications you need to know why web
objects is a good tool for the job and
there are three main reasons and these
are really three themes of the
presentation today but first is that web
objects plus you focus on business logic
now lots of other apps environments
force you to focus on things that you
can't add a lot of value to like writing
the code actually access a database like
day DBZ code or writing SQL to actually
get data from a database well with web
babak's we take care of all the minutiae
of app development that you usually have
to do in other environments and it's
lets you focus on writing your business
logic and that's why you're writing an
application in the first place and like
I said one of one of the reasons lots of
people like using web objects is very
productive it helps you get to market
faster we provide a set of rapid
prototyping tool that allows you to have
a working application literally minutes
and from there you iterate and build
this application that as wiley said in
the State of the Union your one dot o
application is usually better than a tu
lado application that you would get in
another app development environment and
the web objects development provides a
unique development cycle that offers
more opportunities for feedback
throughout the whole development cycle
so rather than just gathering customary
requirements at the end and showing them
the final product we know that that's
not the reality of software development
requirements change and what Bob helps
you adapt to those changing requirements
throughout the development cycle so
let's back up nomos you probably know
what an application server is but let's
provide a broad definite definition of
it one application server provides the
service on the web this could be a
banking service or a student tracking
service or some kind of travel service
and the reason you're presenting it on
the web is that the value of that
application is only as good as many
users use it so you want you have tens
hundreds maybe thousands of users and it
doesn't make sense to deploy this
application on the desktop now for
bobby's of course you can deploy
distributed network applications that
run as desktop applications but the
point is you want to just
too many people and the people who use
your application they might just read
the data in that application but most
likely they're actually contributing to
the data in your repositories and the
web objects we help you use data from
multiple data repositories and present
that it in meaningful form in your end
application and these days it's very
common for applications to exchange and
share data other applications so rather
than an application just living in its
own world we use web services and other
technologies to communicate with other
applications which adds value to all of
them so if we can come up with a picture
of what an application server is this is
a very simple side form so on the one
hand we have data repositories and on
the other hand we have web client and
the important things in it to know about
web objects that doesn't matter what
kind of web client these are they can be
HTML clients they can be swinging
desktop applications they can be web
service client or almost anything you
can get to through java objects and the
role of the application server is to
mediate between the data sources between
the web client and help you get data out
of those data sources and present it to
a meaningful form to web pipe and of
course an application server relies on a
web server to actually communicate with
the outside world we're going to go back
to that picture throughout the
presentation so keep it in mind so like
I said when you think of web objects
well the word web probably connotes HTML
and browsers but that's not all web
babak's is about well so I babak's out
of the box you can target almost any
type of network client most commonly
people target HTML clients web browsers
but also very it's very common to target
swing clients these are desktop
applications that run on a user's
machine much like you know word or I
photo or something like that and the
reason you would do this is you want to
provide a more rich user interface than
HTML allows but also with web objects
out of the box we also allow you to
target soap clients generic xml clients
and even something called smile which is
the synchronized multimedia integration
language that's supported by QuickTime
realplayer other multimedia clients and
we provide a specialized framework so
you can build very rich multimedia
applications standard based applications
that have all the rich access to
databases that web objects provides
and because web object is written in
Java you can target almost any type of
network client that you can get to
through java such as PDF and SVG so just
like web object LP targets with any type
of network client you can use data from
almost any type of data source and out
of the box we provide connectivity to
JDBC and jndi data sources and other
third parties provide connectivity to
other solutions such as SI p so one of
the best parts about web objects is that
it allows you to access these data
sources through java objects so rather
than have to worry about writing your
own JDBC your D&D I code to actually
connect to these data sources we provide
abstraction to these data sources and
you interact with these objects and
usually don't actually need to interact
at all to make these connections these
objects which are Java objects so you
think in Java you think at a very high
level you think in object-oriented terms
and web objects does the work of
connecting to data sources for you and
just like it takes care of accessing the
data sources it also allows you to
express your business logic in Java so a
common way of expressing business logic
is to do it in the database so doing
with stored procedures and triggers and
things like that and that locks you into
that database you have to write in very
low level code but with lab objects we
allow you to express that business logic
in Java which is really a much more a
much more pleasant way to write your
business logic and how do we do this we
do this through software that we call
the enterprise objects frameworks and
this is kind of the crown jewel of web
objects application development this is
a technology that helps you access
databases helps you write your business
logic and is really core the core
element to any web objects application
everybody you're going to become
familiar with these two icons the one on
the left is the icon for EO modeler a
neo modeler is an application that helps
you build new models which is the icon
are presented on the right and these
models are descriptions of your data
they help web Bob they provide web
objects a mapping between your
relational data and java objects we're
going to talk much more about that in
this session so let's go into little
more depth about the three types of most
common types of client applications you
target with web objects
and the first is HTML applications and
the goal here is you want to provide
dunnet dynamic content and you want to
provide it to web browsers you might
have an online catalog and you want to
provide customers with a customized look
and experience when they enter your
catalog with web objects you build the
pages that your HTML applications
express with templates and these
templates are built on the ideas in a
proven component model and what we mean
by that is we spent a long time coming
up with the best way to design these
pages so you build these templates which
are based on this model and the mom this
component model has a lot of interesting
features one the template rewrite are
usually reusable so you can reuse the
same templates within one application or
even between applications so this is
part of the the way that we help what
achieve reusability but also help you
get to market faster to reuse through
reusability and since web objects 5.1
we've heard your request and we've also
now we allow you to integrate your
favorite parts of javaserver pages
technology right with your well
components so if there are parts of the
JSP model that you like we allow you to
integrate that with our component model
to get the both best of both worlds it's
well known examples of HTML web objects
applications are apples Mac creative
services providing the home page
application and mail and also the apple
store so another very newer type a very
popular type of client application you
can target with web objects is a web
service application and web services
there are two types of applications
there are web service servers so that we
say they then database content through
web services which is a set of standard
protocols but the other part of that is
a web service client that actually
consumes the data that this web service
server vent to you and with web objects
we allow you to build both types of
applications we allow you to build a
server and the client and we do this by
putting a layer of abstraction on top of
apache access and patchy access is open
source software for helping you build
web services and it's great to the
software and we love it but we've made
it even easier to use by providing a
layer of abstraction on top
that and we've even done a lot of work
to provide you with plugins so that you
can serialize web objects objects that
you build and enterprise objects that
you build so my favorite kind of web
objects application actually is a java
client application this is what we call
client applications that are written in
swing and the goal here is you want to
provide dynamic content to an
application that runs on the user's
machine not in a web browser but just
like an application it's an application
that the user can double-click and as of
web objects 5.2 we actually allow you to
do this with two architectures we
officially support the three-tier
architecture which includes the web
objects application server in the middle
and in this architecture the app server
mediates all access to the database so
it's very secure and you have total
control over what the clients fees but
we also allow you to build two-tier
desktop applications that access that
allows the client application accesses
the database directly so if you don't
want to worry if you don't have the need
for the weblogic app server in the
middle you can also build that type of
application which is great my favorite
part about web objects java client is
the dynamic user interface generation
provided by something we call director
java client what is this view well allow
you to build these swing desktop
applications without actually writing
any of the swing we have something that
we call the rule system the rule system
helps java client produce these very
rich swing user interfaces so you
actually have app apps internal at Apple
Java client apps that don't have any
swing code in them but they're these
very full-featured rich desktop
applications it's a great part of the
technology and what about Vic Java
client also has a business logic
distribution architecture what does this
mean well you have business objects in
any web objects application and usually
these business objects just live on web
based application server but when you
have a Java client application you have
a client that's smart we have especially
these days clients are very robust they
have lots of memory and very fast
processors so you can actually have put
some of these business objects on the
client side and when you do this you
increase performance and there are
drawbacks of course because any time you
put a Java objects on the client you can
be
usually you can piles and things like
that but this business logic
distribution architecture is flexible
enough to a lot so it gives you total
control over how you want to distribute
your business objects and in what about
weeks 5.2 we even took care of one of
the most difficult parts of tedious
parts of deploying desktop swing
applications over the net and that's
deploying the client application so
we've integrated web start for you so
without having to configure jnlp files
or do anything we just provide a
hyperlink when your application starts
up the client clicks it they
automatically get all the website
functionality and you don't have to
worry about it so that's part of the
heavy lifting philosophy that web babak
takes care of all the hard work for you
and so this is an example of a java
client application you can see it looks
like the Mac os10 application it assumes
the Aqua look and feel of course you can
run this on other Java two platforms so
you run it on windows and you get the
windows look and feel and we can edit
properties and edit relationships and
again all of this is done dynamically on
the fly as the user moves around the
application so those are the three most
common types of client applications you
can target with web objects HTML swing
and web services but I said before that
web objects was designed to be very
flexible and allows you to be creative
and to build new kinds of applications
and one of those that you're very
familiar with I'm sure is the itunes
music store it's actually a web objects
5.2 application on the back end and
iTunes sends requests to to the web
objects application and this application
hands back XML that itunes then
interprets and presents some cheesy
music store and it's actually built with
a lot of our director web technologies
in the back it's very cool stuff that's
just an idea of the flexibility of the
web objects frameworks a lot of you to
do almost anything you want build any
kind of network application so if you
attended the web a big State of the
Union you're familiar with our new
documentation site which just went live
yesterday and it's actually the pages
are all static pages but these pages
come from a web objects application so
add apple we have this running
application and a couple times a day we
ask the application to generate a static
version of all of its pages so we create
this virtual sitemap and we traverse
each of the directories and
and each of the nodes on this site and
generate static versions of the HTML
pages and we can go over to the demo
machine just to give you a sense of what
this means is we get all the teachers or
most of the features of an application
server but with static HTML so you
notice if i look at the Coco
documentation I can sort this list by
simply clicking the column header now
what I'm doing I'm not talking to an
application server I'm just asking for a
static HTML page that's been pre
generated so this gives us the advantage
of we can we can deploy these pages we
can serve these pages with apache
without having to worry about the
overhead of actually deploying an
application an application server so
that's just another example of the
flexibility of web objects and some
different kinds of applications you can
build with it so now I'd like to bring
bill Bumgarner on stage to actually show
you an example of how quickly it is to
get up and running with the web building
a web obvious application thank you
[Applause]
so I'd like to show you two applications
one of the interesting sort of chicken
the egg problems that every developer
faces when you're starting up a project
is you may have your database sort of
kind of initializing there but you don't
have any data in it and because you
don't have any data in it and it's hard
to build the app and you kind of want to
solve both these problems so one of the
focuses of the tools and you'll see this
throughout all of the xcode discussions
as well is that we want to keep you
productive we want to keep you moving
forward in your projects we want to make
you happy developers and I apologize I'm
little new to Apple's own learning the
appropriate marketing term so i guess
our tools kick ass okay so i got that in
good and i'm going to show you how they
kick ass I guess I'm only supposed to
use it like three times there's one more
so okay oh I'm sorry wrong menu item
yeah so I'm going to create a new
project now thank you and I'm going to
create a new direct web application and
I'm going to not use that name I will
call it video store and my goal here is
I have a video database now if I was
into typing in demos I would have gone
into eel modeler and actually reverse
engineer the database but I've already
done that so I'm going to take already
existing models of my database and just
build an application on top of that will
call the video web because we're being
original and we will choose the default
actions once again emphasizing
productivity our default behavior just
move you to your goal and we will add a
couple of yo models here which this is
interesting notice that I'm actually
adding multiple models this means is
they again these tools what I'm showing
you is very simple however the
implications are complex you can have
multiple databases you can have data
across those databases you have
relationships between data on a sybase
database and oracle database front days
and ldap and i'm going to choose the
neutral look let me go ahead and just
creates project let it build and run and
and we'll see what we get excuse me now
what's interesting about this demo is
actually the tools i'm using here the
same stuff that's used to build things
like the music store and other wonderful
technologies out there so here's my
application it's already up and running
let me go ahead and login we don't take
care of security on that page by the way
so that's something you should put that
on your to-do list so as you can see
though now that I'm in my application
I've got all of my stuff my database
it's just showing up all my entities
which correspond to tables I can search
for things I can actually even creates a
new movie or I could drill down and
inspect a movie now I'm happy as a
developer because I can go in and I can
start really working with my data and
I'm five minutes into my project now of
course HTML is the user interface is
somewhat lacking and as mentioned we
also do Java so let me actually create a
new project and this time I'm going to
choose direct to java client and will
call this video web J continuing with
our tradition of originality and again
I'm running through the default answers
here grabbing all the framework adding
the same two yo models I'm going to
steal them from the other project in
this case and continuing down my default
and that last screen may actually go
back this is kind of neat web start so
this will automatically creates a little
thing that you can just kind of shove on
a web page or send an email to start the
application makes distribution very easy
so we'll go ahead and again we're
following the default path
and we'll let this launch excuse me so
what's actually happening here is of
course the applications building etc
this is a director java client so now as
the application launches what you'll see
is a user interface that was dynamically
generated purely for my data model so
there's a bunch of rules in the rule
system that say okay if there's an
entity that has certain kinds of
attributes that are strings then you can
go ahead and create a search form
automatically that actually allows for
very rich interaction with the data now
I look at this immediate when I go you
know i'm doing a video store the first
thing i want to do when I'm
administrating this data is i really
want to focus on movies I'm less
interested about my customers because I
don't have any yet so there's an
assistant and through the assistant you
can actually go in and modify the rules
that are used to drive this application
so the first thing I'm going to do is
I'm going to go to my main entities and
I'm going to bump movies up to the top
of the list and since I'm not a very
good video store honor I'm going to just
remove talent because i don't like
actors so we'll go ahead and apply this
and restart my application and as you
can see already my movies are at the
beginning of the list and I have no
talent in my list hopefully I and for
searching movies you know I really want
to be able to do it by rating I have a
lot of customers and want to come in and
they want to get finding nemo add to
work that into more marketing i'm
learning and so they want to be able to
search by say the rating of the movie so
i can easily come in and i can say ok
whenever I'm querying for a movie again
this is the whole rule system I want to
search by rating and I really don't want
to search by plot summary that just
doesn't make any sense so again I'll
apply and i'll restart the app and i can
come in and i can search for movies to
the rated g
and it'll go off and there's all my
movies that are rated G notice Finding
Nemo is not in the list we need to
update this database but anyway as you
can see I've in five minutes or so have
created two applications that allow you
to work fully and intimately with the
data in your data stores on and what
this means for you as a developer is
that you could get up to speed really
quickly and get into the client or the
customer or your user or your mom if
you're building an app for her face and
say is this what you met is this what
you want it let's go interactive on this
look let's push our product ahead very
rapidly and as was indicated earlier
what that means is the 10 with our stuff
usually is like a 30 with everyone
else's because you're learning all the
time to the development proxies now
these cools a lot of people look at
things like this and they're scared by
it there they're you know worried that
they're going to get locked into our way
of presenting the information that's not
true with the rule system you could
actually build your own super spiffy say
revenue display widget and then in the
rule system say anywhere a revenue is
displayed use this widget so we
encourage reuse throughout all of these
tools as well on and of course once you
have this administrative app you start
building the app facing the user then
you can reuse all that code and the
business logic again so you know we kick
ass because you're productive and we
like to support that there's my third
one so I'll turn it over to printing
[Applause]
thank you
thanks Bill and one thing bill was
emphasizing there at the end is that
bees we just showed you an example of
the rapid development tools and
frameworks that we're Bobby's provide
and that those tools do everything for
you but we also let you do everything on
your own if you want to and they're good
reasons for starting with both
approaches to web objects development so
now we're going to take a minute and
talk about all of the tools that we
provide the great set of tools we
provide to build these applications so
bill showed you two tools three tools he
showed you when he showed you to project
builder and you should use the director
java client assistant and those are just
two tools in the suite so project
builder well this is very important
because this allows you to organize your
project files it provides new project
assistants to help you get up and
running with any of the web objects
application types it's the it's the
application that you use to actually
compile your project and we provide a
front-end to jdb the Java debugger so
that you can graphically debug your web
application which is a java application
we also provide CVS integration so you
don't have to resort to the command line
to get full source control management
and we provide documentation look up so
you can double click on a web objects
method or class name and right there in
project builder see the description for
that class method which is pretty cool
and project builder also is part of the
equation that we label rapid turnaround
and rapid turnaround is a feature in web
optics that allows you to make changes
to your applications usually to the user
interface to save the changes and to see
them reflected in the running
application without having to recompile
and there are other tools that work with
project builder to make this possible
we'll talk about in a minute so I talked
about you model or an imam allure is
really the most important tool in web
publix development because it allows you
to build data model and as you saw by
simply providing web objects a
description of your data you can
actually get full featured running
applications for free but even if you're
not using the rapid development tools
and frameworks to build web applications
you really still need to date a model
because this Dale model is is how you
provide the data to the templates the
visual pages that you construct so how
do you build these data models well yo
modeler is very smart and
we'll actually reverse engineer a model
for you from an existing database so a
lot of projects start from existing data
so you simply point eal modeler to your
database and like I said out of the box
this is support jdbc and jndi and it
looks at all the tables and all the
columns and all and all the joints and
it creates entities attributes and
relationships from all that information
so you don't actually have to worry
about creating the model in many cases
you may want to make tweaks to it but if
you don't have a database you need to
create a schema andia model can actually
help you think about that schema in
entity-relationship terms and then we'll
write that that schema back to the
database for you so it's a great data
modeling tool also and we also think of
EO modeler as a front end to the
enterprise objects framework because it
actually allows you to configure a lot
of the more sophisticated
characteristics of things in EOS let's
will talk about more in a second so what
does it you model or do well helps you
map relational data structures to java
objects we said that with web objects
web object allows you to build your
business logic in java objects but in
order to do that we have to be able we
have to have a way to get the changes
that you make to your java objects back
into the data stores so we need a
description we need a mapping of that
amount Sofia model or does it helps you
map entity at the table attributes the
columns and relationships to join and
another great feature of eos and you
modeler is that you can model
inheritance so as a Java developer it's
common to build inheritance hierarchies
into your application so you might have
a person superclass and you might have
concrete subclasses of it such as
student teacher administrator if you're
at an educational institution well this
is a very natural way to think in Java
in object-oriented terms but when it
also be nice if you could translate that
hierarchy into something that persists
in a relational database well we fully
support that with eos and you'll modeler
allows you to map your java inheritance
hierarchies to your relational tables a
new model also helps you build fetch
specifications which are descriptions of
the data you want to fetch which also
usually include things like store
notaries you can do all of these things
in code in fact you can even build
models in code
but you a modeler is we provide it
because it's a lot easier to do it with
a graphical tool so if you're building
web HTML applications you need to build
these page templates I was talking about
so we provide a tool that helps you do
that called web objects builder and
fundamentally it's an HTML editor but
especially is it it helps you write
these page templates and these page
templates and web objects are made up of
something we call dynamic element and a
dynamic element is just what it sounds
like it's an HTML element whose values
and characteristics are resolved at
runtime and what objects builder has
collections of these dynamic elements on
pallets if you drag out these elements
you put them on your templates and you
connect them up to your enterprise
objects and so that's that's how we say
that integration that web babak's
builders integrated with enterprise
objects it knows about the entities in
your data model it knows about their
attributes it knows about the
relationships these are things that your
yield model provides and mob objects
builder is also plays a part in this
thing we call rapid turnaround so in
many cases you can make changes to the
HTML templates you build in web of weeks
builder save them refresh the page in
the client browser and see those changes
reflected without having to recompile
rebuild your application so this is one
way one way that weblog helps you get to
market factor by removing some of these
steps in the development process so we
touched on rapid development and rapid
development is one of the cool features
of web objects and it includes a number
of tools so there are three types of
client applications that you can target
with the rapid development frameworks
one is an HTML client there's a Java
client a third is a web services client
in each of these types of client
applications has its own assistant an
assistant these assistants are front
ends to the rule system so the real
system is is we consider it kind of like
a black box it's very smart and knows
how to do all these things but to
interact with it you need to write these
rules these rules can kind of be hard to
learn to write so what these assistants
do is they provide valid configurations
and valid combinations of these rules
that you can just choose in a graphical
user interface which has a result of
writing these rules for
you and this enables code free rule
driven so how these tools all work
together well we divide the web objects
development workflow into three general
phases the first is a data access phase
second here's the business logic phase
and third is presentation logic and each
of the tools have a specialized role in
each one of these phases so in the data
access phase of course the goal is to
get data or get a description of the
data in a JDBC database a jndi directory
into an eel model file and you use you a
modeler to do this so that's really the
first step and once you have this
description of your data then you're
ready to write your business logic and
in web objects you write your business
logic in Java so when you edit your Java
files in project builder so this is the
business logic phase of the workflow and
after you've done that you work on your
presentation logic so you use web babic
builder to build HTML templates you use
director java client to build 20
obligations but you can also use
interface builder this is the same
interface builder that you use to build
carbon and cocoa applications for mac OS
10 we've actually extended it so when
you build a java client interface and
interface builder we actually write out
the swing for you so in this case we're
not dynamically generating user
interface on the fly as the user moves
around the application but we're
actually using a chunk of static swing
that interface builder generates of
course you can integrate both the static
interface and the dynamic interface in
the application so if you need very
precise control over one particular
window in your application you can do
that in interface builder and finally if
you're building a web services
application whether you're building the
server side or the client side if you're
building the server side you use
something we call d web services
assistant and if you're building a
client where you can build browser based
web service clients with the web objects
frameworks but you all might also be
interested in building a web service
client to target something like Sherlock
and so we show this workflow we show the
arrows going from one side to the other
well it doesn't mean that you have to
finish the data access phase before you
move on to the business logic phase and
then finish the business logic before
the presentation logic you can
go back and make changes that in any one
of these realms but this illustration is
just here so you get an idea of how the
tools work together ok so we've talked
about we've shown you a demo of HTML
applications and Java client
applications but what about Web Services
I'm going to bring on the world's
foremost Jamaican Chinese web objects
developer on Sage Romney saying shows
the demo of web services of my Baba cool
thanks Brent so first off you guys know
about web services and how print
explained that with access we're able to
bring web services to web objects or
vend web services through web objects on
top of that we've added a technology
that we call director web services which
makes it even easier to start building a
web services server so I'm going to
start a new project and I'll choose
direct web services is my application
type and I'll choose a silly name so I
prefer to again go through all the
default settings choose the movies model
and I'll just build and launch the
application so what it's going to do is
put together a list of the entities in
my model and figure out exactly what
should be vended as a web service it'll
give you a set of defaults and you can
go and tweak those and customize it and
the application that we use for tweaking
the web services settings is another
assistant the web services assistant so
we'll plug in this URL that is that was
given to us and poof you can see here we
see we have a service and we take the
approach of being paranoid for our web
services so none of the services are
turned on by default so nobody can go in
and start sending random soak for these
services anything that's not
specifically enabled is disallowed so
we'll go ahead and enable our special
default web service called appropriately
enough default web service so we'll add
an entity to our default web service as
far as public entities go
once once I've added this entity you can
look over here in the service list and
we'll add a couple of operations so what
we've done here is go through the entity
that we've added and looked at what such
specifications are defined and as well
as just what what arguments should be
exposed as web service arguments so we
haven't written any code yet and we've
always done is focused on our business
logic and already we can already publish
a web service let's start by just moving
a couple of entities out I just want to
search on rating for my movies let's say
we'll remove these we can change what
arguments are sent to the web service
and what return values are sent back to
the web service client let's just say
we're interested in the title the rating
again and we can also from this list
here choose to see the studio name we
can go through relationships when we're
returning values from the web service so
all this again is going through the rule
system and changing values only in the
rule system you don't have to write any
code to change the settings for your web
service let's go ahead and return or try
and test this one of the things about
web services by the way you you really
have to put together a Wizzle file web
services description language file
saying what arguments you expect and
what results the the client can expect
to get back from invoking a web service
rather than have to write all that for
you write all that yourself director web
services generates all of this lovely
XML for you so you can go ahead and be
productive immediately like testing the
application so we'll search for all
rated G movies we'll get back a list of
all the rated G movies good look for PG
and test it
so one of the things that you also
notice is we haven't had to go through
and write any access code we haven't had
to do anything actually parsing the
wisdom our selves we've figured out the
director web services assistant can
actually parse the wisdom and put up a
dynamic you I so that we already have
something that we can use to invoke the
web service and test it if we go back
you can see if we add a title as an
input argument we get rating and title
as the as the UI to test with click and
rate look for all PG movies actually one
other thing we can change the operator
that is used so we can look for case
insensitive like on the title look for
all PG movies that start with S so and
there aren't any g movies to start with
that so it's a simple example of how
quickly you can get running up and
running with a web service application
using the director web services
technology it's very simple very easy to
use and you should use it
back to brim thank you Ron so there's
something we need to emphasize about the
demos you've seen today now they
demonstrate that you can go very far in
a web objects application without
writing any code and that's true
everything you saw here today is what
you can get in the trial version of
Ebonics and in the box when we buy it
but web objects is not a toy it's a
programmers tool you really need to be a
programmer to use it now we take care of
a lot of the difficult things for you so
you don't have to be BA so you don't
have to be a DBA to write web Alex
application that uses multiple databases
but you do need to be a programmer a
Java programmer to really build a usable
application so you can go far but we
don't want to give you the sense that
you can go all the way in application
development with web objects without
knowing how to write a little bit of
code so after saying that we need to
talk about how all of this is how we
make all this possible so let's talk
about the building block behind every
web application and the building blocks
are something we call framework well
what's a framework a framework is
software and it provides a lot of
pre-built functionality that you plug
into another way of thinking about this
is a framework knows how to do a lot of
things the web objects frameworks know
how to access databases they know how to
generate HTML they know how to do web
services stuff well they don't know what
to do they don't know what you want want
them to do so you have to brought
provide information you have to tell
them tell the framework what kind of
data you want to fetch or what your page
templates look like so a key idea about
frameworks is that they do all the
driving and all the heavy lifting well
what does this mean well they know how
to do a lot of things and one of the the
most common obstacles that new web of
objects developers face is that they
start writing all this fancy code to do
all these things that they think they
need to do when actually the frameworks
do all this for you so you need to learn
to trust but these frameworks actually
know what they're doing and that your
goal your role as a web objects
developer is to understand the frame
works well enough to know how to harness
the functionality they provide so you
write less code and when you write less
code you write
bug and you write a better application
so the weblogic frameworks have been
around for a long time web objects was
actually the first application server a
long time ago and becomes around for a
long time these frameworks have had a
lot of years to get really good to the
point that we say they incorporate a lot
of the best practices of object-oriented
programming and they actually share a
lot of these best practices with cocoa
apples other object oriented not
framework for building desktop
applications and I want to talk about
three of these because they're really
important one is key value coding when
you start reading the web objects
documentation you're going to see this
all over the place and you look at the
API reference and talk to people and
they're going to talk about key value
coding well what is this well it simply
encompasses the classic object-oriented
design paradigm to encapsulate the thing
that varies well what varies in an
application what varies is how your
objects provide access to their data
they might provide access to the data
through an accessor method preferably or
through an instance variable and how in
the name of that accessor method or
instance variable could be different
well what key value killing does it
abstract away all of that diversity and
how their object and how objects present
their data and allows you to access
dated by key or by name and if you'll
see you later on this is very powerful
because if we have business objects that
have very complex relationships in them
we can actually get to the data in those
different objects simply by traversing
what we call a key path and this is all
enabled to t value coding name based
look up another important idea is
delegation it's kind of a complex thing
and you don't need to know about it to
get started but we said that the web
objects frameworks are very flexible and
one way they're flexible is that the
class designers the people who designed
the classes in these frameworks provide
opportunities for you to customize these
classes and they do it through something
we call delegation and this is a way for
the class designer to say at this point
in this object execution I want to
provide other developers a way to
intercept things and provide custom
functionality so rather than requiring
you to actually subclass one of our
classes and override a bunch of things
we provide things called delegates which
provides you a great deal of flexibility
and model view controller is another key
idea in the web objects frameworks
this is a paradigm you're probably all
familiar with and in what about Reese
development it means the same thing it
means that we divided we think about the
objects in weblogic in three different
realms the model realm which is your
data in your business logic the view
realm which is what your user actually
sees and interact with and the
controller which is the glue between the
two so let's talk about three of the
frameworks that every web objects
application no matter what type of
client you're targeting will use the
first of the foundation framework this
is a set of powerful vast collection and
utility classes things for managing your
applications data structures it's
important to understand that the
foundation framework doesn't replace the
JDK classes it's actually built on top
of them and it complements the JDK
classes but like I said web babak's has
been around a long time and it's
actually not written in Java originally
it's a lot of these classes predate a
lot of the JDK classes and they're very
mature and provide a lot of really
really great functionality a lot of what
you can actually don't get in the
standard Java classes the foundation
framework also provides an
infrastructure for notification in a web
objects application you have possibly
hundreds or thousands of objects running
at runtime and usually they need to
communicate with each other maybe a user
makes a change to a Business Objects
well chances are that other objects
depend on the state of that object well
a notification architecture allows those
objects to communicate in a way so the
objects are very loosely coupled so we
have another object that we introduced
which is called a notification center
and an object's tell a notification
center when something when their state
changes or when a certain event occurs
and other objects tell the Notification
Center do they want to know about when
other objects change their state so in
the end we have like this dynamic
nervous system of objects communicating
with each other without directly having
references to them this is one of those
other great best practices of
programming that the MOBOTIX frameworks
incorporate foundation framework also
provides basic infrastructure for
validating the data in your objects and
as a 5 web objects 5.2 includes the xml
serialization classes that make it very
easy to serialize web objects and
enterprise objects so the web objects
framework
this is the framework that bootstraps
all types of web objects applications so
whether you're living in HTML a swing or
a web service web objects application
this framework helps you get up and
running and it manages something called
a request-response loop clients send
requests into your application server
the web objects framework helps you
dissect that request and in the end
after you've all your business logic and
application logic have made the
decisions they need to make it helps
package up a response and sends it back
out to the client we talked about the
page templates and the infrastructure
for that is rooted in the web objects
framework the most important thing that
mobotix framework does is it manages
state we all know that the web is
inherently stateless there are no
facilities for tracking state on the web
so that's really what what one of the
main roles of an app server is to
provide state and there are three realms
of state there's global application
state data that you want all of your
users in every session in your
application to share there is per
session or per user state so if you want
to provide a customized personalized
experience to each user as they enter
your site you need to store the state
for that session and even within a given
page you may need to keep track of the
session if a user requests that page
again so the webelos framework manages
state in those three realms so we
introduced the enterprise objects
frameworks before so if you having a
hard time understanding of what this
actually is there are two industry
standard terms that will give you a
sense of what it accomplishes one is
entity relational modeling others object
relational mapping and these are ways of
thinking of your data in higher level
terms and tables and columns and joined
thinking about them more abstractly as
an object like we said this takes care
of writing all that low-level code that
you as a human should ever have to write
the framework takes care of it it's much
more reliable than you writing you know
for joins to traverse a complex
relationship and allows you to focus on
business objects like we said so one
thing you have to trust about using EOS
that's what we call it is that java
indications you make so implications to
make on your objects actually results in
the end in certain database operations
such as select inserts and updates so
once you learn to trust that you're
going to get a lot further as
objects developer so there are two
really important terms in EOS we're
talking about business objects well your
business objects are actually instances
of something we call an enterprise
object and these enterprise objects live
in an editing context the editing
context is a container and I bring these
up now because in any when you start
actually writing code in an application
these are two of the the types of
objects you'll be interacting with most
often this is a really important set of
frameworks but we got have two slides on
it there we go so it also includes a
high-level qualifier language so when
you need to write a description and tell
us what kind of data you want to fetch
what we allow you to do this in Java
with a very english-like syntax so
rather than have to worry about the
joint you need to write and all of the
appropriate sequel you're right in very
high-level qualifier objects that didn't
get transposed down to the database
layer we manage joins for you like I
said and yo F introduces the idea of T
path so very quick example if we have an
address object referred to by the
address key and we have a street
property in that object we can get to
that data simply by using this chain of
keys and this is all enabled by p value
coding like we discussed before and us
provides automatic transparent access to
multiple data sources so if you want
your business objects to be composed of
data from an Oracle database and a front
front plates database they can do this
and you don't really have to think about
it and you have includes the validation
infrastructure that allows you to
provide validation on properties so on
the data in your objects and you might
want to validate that data at certain
points in the applications execution if
a user requests to save data you want to
make sure you want to validate the data
before you actually it actually gets to
the database and UF provides its
infrastructure like I said there's also
very rich support for inheritance in
enterprise objects so we're talking
about framework so what where does your
code how's your code work with the
frameworks well if the enterprise
objects framework is on the database
side and the web objects framework is on
the client side your business logic
plugs in the eof and your application
logic logic plugs into the web objects
framework and the inner running appliqu
clients send requests in they come in
through these web server which words it
to the application server the web of
extreme work takes over and helps you
make sense of that client requests in
the in conjunction with your application
logic and your business logic perhaps
that user requested data and if so you f
will help you get that data out of a
database and put that data to get that
data in the form of objects which you
can send that you pass back through your
application you use that those objects
to populate these page templates that
you write and then the web experiment a
response that gets sent out to the
client we talked about rapid development
and we're running a little short so
behind the scenes so this is a one of
the examples that ships with the web
objects product it's called I shacks it
allows it's a front end to the real
estate database that you saw in no you
didn't it's a front end to a database we
ship as one of examples which is a real
estate database so how does this page
happen what's what's going on behind the
scenes to actually produce this page
well the first layer is HTML there's
this page is made of HTML well where
does this HTML come from well it comes
from one of these low components and
this component happens to be the search
page component and this component
includes a bunch of dynamic elements the
values the content of these dynamic
elements is resolved at runtime so well
components we touched on briefly before
their page templates they're made up of
standard HTML Javascript and other web
content but most importantly they're
made up of these dynamic elements more
components are reusable and nestable so
you can reuse a component within your
application it's very common to have a
common page wrapper component that all
the pages all the components in your
application use you only have to write
that component one and you can put it in
all of your templates so you get the
same that same field without writing
more code components are synchronized
and they communicate with one another
each component has a Java object behind
it and that's really key so this isn't
just a component is not just a set of
HTML with a little bit of JavaScript ER
you know maybe even sequel and it like
other kinds of component models but
there's actually a Java object behind
these components so this allows you to
store state and lodge
k with other Java objects such as your
business objects the more components
have full access to session and
application data so if you need to
provide a customized personalized
experience on a particular page you have
access to a user's session please
dynamic elements things like we said
there HTML tags their characteristics
and values are determined at runtime
let's look at an example so in that I
shacks example page that we showed you
see slides ago there's a pop-up menu and
the pop-up menu allows you allows you to
narrow down the scope of your search it
allows you to choose a state so each
dynamic element has a number of
different attributes and you bind these
attributes to values in your business
objects static values may be whatever so
in this case we're calling out the value
attribute and the value attribute is
bound to a key path we talked about Chi
paths before so in this case it's
looking for an object that's resolved by
the name T and it's looking for the
abbreviation of that state such as VA
for California so at runtime that lists
that that 50 state list element list
will not include the full name of state
but rather the abbreviation ok so we're
talking about development we're almost
done here so but once you're done
developing application you actually need
to deploy it and if you attended the web
public State of the Union we introduced
new ways of deploying your applications
in Panther server with jboss and there
are two sessions dedicated specifically
to this so please go see them but I want
to cover two very quick things today
there are two types of deployment
there's a standard rebeck deployment
using our tools and deployment
infrastructure and there's servlet
deployment which allows you to deploy
your web babak's application as a
servlet in tomcat and jboss weblogic etc
ok so in sum with web objects you write
less code you get a lot of functionality
out of the box for free the objects you
write are usually reusable the
enterprise objects framework allows you
to build database independent
application so you make might start
developing your application on one
database and move to another production
database when you're finished when you
deploy we have a lot of innovative very
cool technologies like the rapid
tools and frameworks for doing
rule-based development and we allow you
to end up we provide a number of
flexible deployment options so how do
you get started there are thousands and
thousands of pages of documentation on
web objects we suggest getting started
with beasts for first web applications
will take you through building an HTML
application includes a number of
tutorials and the ideas that you learned
in there are really applicable to all
kinds of web-based applications so your
feet of developing a web service
application you should still start with
that book the familiars familiarize
yourself with the concept and using EO
modeler not only teaches you how to use
EO modelers but it also introduces a lot
of the important concepts in the
enterprise objects framework and if you
want to learn more about the dynamic
elements that we provide for you there's
the dynamic elements reference and if
you're unfamiliar with project builder
or even if you are familiar with it
there are a few things that are unique
to web babak's development that a lot of
people are confused about at the
beginning so so consult that specialized
project builder for web objects
developers document clear it all up who
to contact we always love to hear your
feedback your ideas for the product so
web objects an apple com is probably the
best way to get a hold of us
you